>> Breath.
Most of us take it
for granted, and yet,
as an influx of recent
studies show, when
we learn to control
it, it can be the key
not only to our
physical well-being,
but to our spiritual
transformation.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Breathwork is the conscious
awareness and control
of the breath through the
practice of various techniques.
While breath practices had
been incorporated for millennia
in many religious and
spiritual traditions,
they were largely
forgotten with the rise
of the modern Western world.
Today however, we
are in the midst
of a massive
resurgence of interest
in these ancient practices.
Ben Stewart is a
filmmaker who has
been researching and practicing
breathwork for years.
>>BEN STEWART: We
always have breath.
It's free, and it's relegated
to the subconscious for the most
part of our lives.
And when we bring it back
into the conscious realm,
just the very act of bringing
awareness to the breath
is something that augments
the experience of what
the breath is doing to us.
But also, just becoming
aware of your breath
allows you to realize
how much we actually
hold our breath, how
interrupted and inconsistent
our breathing really is.
So breath work is bringing in
the idea of bringing awareness
before intention, pre
intention, bringing awareness
to the breath.
And then the intention
could be just,
I want to bring more
awareness to the breath
for an extended period
of time, all the way to I
want to heal some deeper traumas
that have been holding onto
or experience the
other side of whatever
the confines of what they
call the default mode
network, the confines of
everyday waking consciousness.
>> Dr. John Douillard is
the leading practitioner
of our Ayurveda, the ancient
Indian system of medicine.
He has been
incorporating breathwork
in his practice for decades.
>>JOHN DOUILLARD: Breathwork
is really popular these days,
and for good reason.
You know, pranayama, the
word prana means breath.
And then the word
yama means to pause.
So there is something
really special about being
able to hold your breath for
extended periods of time.
When you actually look at
the science behind kumbhaka
or breath retention,
it's actually
called intermittent hypoxia.
And intermittent
hypoxia has been
studied to increase
stem cells, it's
been shown to increase
angio growth factors.
>> There are many different
breathwork techniques.
From the ancient yogic
practice of alternate nostril
breathing to the more vigorous
modern styles, such as Wim
Hof breathing, all
breathwork practices
consist of augmenting
inhale, exhale and retention.
Recent studies have
pointed to breathwork's
myriad physiological benefits.
>>DOUILLARD: The main benefits
of pranayam techniques done
properly are things like really
fully oxygenating your tissue,
so you don't have
degenerative effects.
Nitric oxide, a Nobel
Prize-winning molecule,
a panacea molecule is released.
Hormones that rebuild the
nervous system, like EPO.
It lowers blood sugar,
lowers blood pressure,
it protects the endothelial
lining of your arteries,
protects your genes
from expressing
negative traits that
happen as you age
if your tissues are hypoxic.
>> As the connector between
the mind and the body,
breath has also been shown to
exert a profound physiological
effect.
>>DOUILLARD: It increases
neuroplasticity,
so you change all the mental
emotional patterns of behavior,
which is really the most
important reason why
we do both breathwork
in the first place,
because it changes our brain.
It actually unravels old
mental emotional patterns
that make us do the same
dumb stuff again and again.
It makes us conscious.
So when you think about
any Vedic science,
it's always about accessing some
level of full human potential,
realizing that the
human body is actually
an instrument for
perceiving subtle energy.
And to actually refine
that instrument and fine
tune that instrument is all
about what pranayam does.
>> For many practitioners, it
is this consciousness expansion,
which is breastwork's most
transformative element.
>>STEWART: Nowadays,
it's really becoming
this free auxiliary method
of doing what plant medicines
and meditation was there to do.
You're augmenting all of
these gases inside the body
so you can have an
altered experience
so you can step outside
of the confines of who
and what you think you are.
>> For those interested in
starting a breathwork practice,
practitioners suggest choosing
one method that works for them
and practicing it consistently.
Dr. John Douillard particularly
recommends a technique
called Pratiloma in Ayurveda.
It has recently been studied
in hospitals under the name
inspiratory muscle
training, and found
to have remarkable benefits
in heart, lung, respiratory
and digestive conditions.
>>DOUILLARD: You would
just take your fingers
and partially close
your nostrils about 75%.
Basically, you take a
breath all the way in.
[INHALES]
And then open up your
nostrils, let it out.
And again.
[INHALES]
And open up your
nostrils, let it out.
Again, it's very vigorous.
[INHALES]
And when you at the very
tippy top, let it out,
you feel your
diaphragm contract.
Try it one more time.
Breath in all the way.
[INHALES]
All the way to the tippy
top, and underneath your rib
cage you'll feel your
diaphragm contracting maybe
for the first time.
That's forcing that
diaphragm to contract,
pulling the air in, forcing
the rib cage to break open
all the rust and the
rigidity in your rib cage
and forcing that's
become like 12 levers,
massaging your heart and your
lungs 28,000 times per day.
What I typically recommend is do
10 up to 30 of the Pratilomas.
[INHALES]
And then let it out.
10 of those to 30 of those.
And at the last, after the
last exhale, do a breath hold.
Just hold your
breath comfortably.
And as soon as you feel
the urge to breathe,
then go right back into
another round of Pratiloma.
So if you did three to five
sets of that two times a day
for a month, it'll
change your world.
>> Proponents of breathwork
have high hopes that it will
continue to be studied and
incorporated into standard
medical practice.
>>STEWART: I'm really interested
in seeing how breathwork
can be looked at as the
fundamental platform
for all health no
matter what that it
is, in my humble opinion,
it really is that.
It needs to be reintroduced
back into medicine.
And I think teaching
humans how to breathe
should come before
we teach people
any math, any geography,
anything else.
We should be teaching our
children how to breathe.
We need a lot more people
in their center, empowered.
I think that's breath.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia news.